This is Los Angeles, the second largest
city in the United States.
But it looks different compared to New
York City and Chicago.
It has big yards and low buildings. It
doesn't fit the typical image of
overcrowding you'd expect from a place
like Midtown Manhattan.
But behind that facade of cute
freestanding homes are families that are
doubling up and spending more than half
their income on housing.
The suburban look is hiding a housing
crisis while simultaneously being the
cause of that crisis. And this is the
result not of chance or of specific
political ideology, but of decades of
decisions from individuals across the
political spectrum that have prevented
new housing from being built even as
more people moved in.
This is the story about the evil design
of Los Angeles
and why LA can't build.
These are the rents in New York and San
Francisco.
But this is the rent in LA.
It doesn't seem that awful at first
glance, but it's only half the picture.
Incomes are much lower in LA.
Half of all tenants in LA spend over 50%
of their income on rent and utilities.
It has the highest home price to income
ratio in the United States.
As a result, it also has the worst
overcrowding in the nation.
Others drive until they afford with
commutes of over 90 minutes each way.
Hours of life gone that will never come
back stuck in traffic that was
artificially created and unnecessary.
The Los Angeles metropolitan area
stretches 80 miles inland deep into the
desert. And yet, LA leaders have
repeatedly opposed efforts to build more
housing.
But it wasn't always this way.
Videos like these wouldn't be possible
without our sponsors like Opera. A video
by Ali Zoney means I've got dozens of
tabs open at once.
Opera has this feature called tab
islands where you group tabs by topic.
One island for housing data, one for
transit, one for state legislation.
You can collapse the ones you're not
using and expand them when you need
them. And you can even change the colors
of each tab.
When I need to cross-reference sources,
I just drag a tab down and split my
screen. Up to four pages visible at
once. Zoning map next to a policy
document next to the original source. No
juggling windows.
And if I need to quickly summarize
whatever page I'm reading, Opera has AI
built right into the browser. No
extensions, no account, and it's free.
It can also look at all the tabs in an
island at once and find common threads
across sources.
And if you prefer a different AI, you
can add ChatGPT or Gemini right into the
sidebar and have them at hand without
opening extra tabs.
In the sidebar, I now have easy access
to the tools I use daily like Gmail,
Google Calendar.
I can review new messages while working
on zoning documents, flag important
senders, send quick replies, and open
relevant links.
All without leaving my research
workflow.
I can also see upcoming meetings,
deadlines, and block time for analyses,
all in one strip alongside my other
sources.
If needed, I can add new events from
relevant tabs or documents directly to
the same calendar from the search
window.
If you do any kind of research online,
give Opera a try. It's free. Link is in
the description.
LA was once a cheap place to live and
built lots of housing with a pro-growth
government.
In the early 1900s, investors built new
streetcar lines and built housing on the
land around them.
Later on, development followed cars and
roads.
Ironically, the same mild weather that
could have made LA a walkable city
enabled it to become the first
car-centered city.
Early cars were open-air vehicles that
couldn't handle bad weather.
A popular type of multi-family housing
during this time was the bungalow court.
They place several small houses around a
landscaped courtyard in the middle.
They combined the appeal of one's own
house with the affordability of only
needing a fraction of a standard lot.
Most bungalow courts did not have
parking. There were even limits to how
many parking spaces could be built.
Instead, residents parked along the curb
at the side of the street.
But as more bungalow courts were built,
curbside parking could not keep up.
A bungalow court could have eight to 10
homes, but only enough space to park
three cars in front.
In 1934 to 1935, LA's zoning was changed
to require that every unit come with a
parking space, with more for larger
homes.
Rather than being left at bare minimum
to market forces, it was mandated from
above.
As a two-car household became more
common, parking requirements were
further increased in 1958.
As a result, during LA's post-war
housing boom, bungalow courts were
illegal to build.
Instead, a new type of housing was
invented, the dingbat.
It's named after the large decorations
tacked onto the front of the building.
Designed to have a parking space for
each apartment, the classic dingbat is a
two-story wood building with stucco
walls.
Most of the first floor is parking, with
apartments in the back and perched above
the parking on stilts.
Like bungalow courts, a typical dingbat
could have six to 12 homes on a single
lot.
The golden age of the dingbat ended in
the mid-1960s, when parking requirements
were increased again to 1.5 spaces for
each two-bedroom apartment. This was
very hard to fit on a single lot.
The 50-ft width of a standard Los
Angeles lot is less than the 60-ft width
of a standard parking aisle.
Instead, developers shifted to combining
lots to build larger apartment buildings
with semi-underground parking.
But then Los Angeles downzoned, reducing
the size of buildings allowed. However,
the parking requirements ended up doing
that anyway.
After the 1960s, many buildings weren't
built to the maximum height or density
allowed because there was no way to
provide enough parking for that many
apartments.
Unable to build up, LA built outwards.
Boxed in by mountains and the ocean,
suburban development followed freeways,
crossing mountain passes and county
lines into surrounding valleys.
By the early 2000s, this model stopped
working.
Los Angeles had sprawled out 80 miles
inland, deep into Riverside and San
Bernardino counties.
The same thing that happened to Los
Angeles happened to its suburbs when
land ran out.
Housing costs went up, doubling in just
a few years.
As gas prices soared, long commutes went
from merely being unpleasant to
unaffordable.
But the double crisis of high gas prices
and high housing costs had at least one
silver lining.
Angelenos were finally starting to take
the train again,
which had difficulty competing with the
very centrally planned automobile.
Seeing the need and the opportunity,
activists worked with then LA Mayor
Antonio Villaraigosa to fund transit.
The effort brought together business,
labor, environmentalists to back a
ballot measure to fund the construction
of new rail lines and other transit
improvements.
In 2008, Los Angeles voters approved
Measure R.
It was close. Due to a 1978 California
ballot measure, 2/3 of voters had to
vote yes for Measure R to pass.
67% voted yes.
However, building transit would not
solve LA's housing crisis.
Behind Los Angeles's past downzonings
and current reluctance to allow housing
near transit is a deep-seated opposition
to build new housing.
To many voters in this car-dependent
city, the idea of more neighbors meant
more traffic. And to many landowners,
rising housing costs weren't a bad
thing. It meant that the land their home
sat on was worth more.
These landowners were often the only
ones to vote.
Until 2020, when Los Angeles switched to
even-year elections, voter turnout could
be as low as 11%.
The LA suburbs were no better. With the
metropolitan area fragmented into 191
cities, of which less than a quarter
lived in the city of Los Angeles, a win
in one city was not enough.
Much of the coast, where a lot of the
region's jobs were located, is outside
the LA city limits.
Recent years in LA local policy has been
one step forward, one-step backwards.
In 2022, newly elected LA Mayor Karen
Bass signed Executive Directive 1. ED1
directed city staff to review and
approve plans for affordable housing
faster.
Projects that previously faced a
multi-year and uncertain approval
process were now guaranteed a permit
within a couple of months.
ED1 was a big success.
This was good policy. Private developers
submitted plans to build affordable
housing
even without needing a subsidy.
But in the world of LA politics, it was
too big of a success.
By the following year, much of the law
had been rolled back.
Single-family zones, which made up 3/4
of the city, were made off-limits.
Los Angeles ended up stuck between a
rock and a hard place.
On the one hand, some homeowners who
preach the virtues of free enterprise
and markets, but who fight tooth and
nail to keep strict government
regulations in place.
They block liberalization and use the
law to artificially prop up their land
values, ensuring housing does not
commodify.
On the other hand, progressives who talk
about affordability, but make it even
more difficult for private developers to
build.
Out of fear of people extracting profits
when so many people can't afford to
live, they put counterproductive burdens
on those who actually build and renovate
houses, while indirectly handing a
fortune to the people who simply inherit
them.
Because the scarcity still remains.
Luckily, starting in the mid-2010s, the
YIMBY movement organized to pass new
laws to remove obstacles to building
housing.
These included reducing parking
requirements and allowing more housing
to be built.
But the LA region never got on board.
In 2025, San Francisco State Senator
Scott Wiener introduced SB 79, his third
attempt to override local zoning and
allow apartments to be built near
transit stations.
As the bill approached its final votes
in the state capital, LA City Council
members Tracy Park and John Lee
organized to oppose it. They represented
wealthy suburban districts along the
coast and in the San Fernando Valley.
Together, they introduced a resolution
to have the city of Los Angeles formally
oppose SB 79.
Katy Yaroslavsky, Heather Hunt, Isabel
Yurado, Tim McOsker, Imelda Padilla, and
Monica Rodriguez joined Park and Lee in
voting to maintain artificially induced
scarcity.
Mayor Karen Bass agreed with them.
Of LA's 15 council member, only five
were pro SB 79.
Among them council member Raman, who
urged the council to support SB 79,
stating that the LA council talk a lot
about our housing crisis on this body,
but our actions have not met the moment.
Back in the state capital, many LA
legislators voted no or skipped the
vote, functionally the same as voting
no.
Many represented the same neighborhoods
as the council members that opposed SB
79.
Luckily, a coalition of legislators from
California's other major cities, the Bay
Area, San Diego, and Sacramento, joined
forces with rural legislators to pass SB
79.
Rural areas were tired of dealing with
the spillover effects of the urban
housing shortage.
As a final sweetener, SB 79 was narrowed
to only apply to urban counties to get
the bill over the finish line.
The housing shortage remains severe.
While zoning obstacles have been
overcome, construction remains slow due
to a weak economy and rising
construction costs.
But at long last, there's light at the
end of the tunnel for Los Angeles.
However, for much of the rest of the
country, the problems are just getting
started.
Wherever the US is headed, California
will get there first.
Due to the high housing costs, many
Californians moved to cheaper parts of
the country, especially when remote work
became more popular.
But what was cheap to Californians
became unaffordable for locals.
In cities across the Sun Belt and
Mountain West, there wasn't enough
supply to meet this added demand.
Worse, many of these cities still
following the playbook that LA used in
the late 20th century, artificially
created suburban sprawl and highways.
While some don't have mountains or
oceans hemming them in like LA. Many
have squandered that extra land by
building at a density even lower than
LA.
Eventually, they too will hit a dead end
when there's no more room to build
outward that's still within commuting
range.
Whether they will learn from Los Angeles
and reverse course in time is to be
seen.